artificial intelligence is superhuman it
is smarter than you are and there's
something inherently dangerous for the
Dumber party in that relationship you
just can't put the genie back in the
bottle Sam Harris neuroscientist
philosopher author podcaster he goes
into intellectual territory where a few
others their tread six years ago you did
a TED Talk the gains we make in
artificial intelligence could ultimately
destroy us if your objective is to make
Humanity happy and there was a button
placed in front of you and it would end
artificial intelligence what would you
do well I would definitely pause it the
idea that we've lost the moment to
decide whether to hook our most powerful
AI to everything it's just oh it's
already connected to the internet got
millions of people using it and the idea
that these things will stay aligned with
us because we have built them we gave
them a capacity to rewrite their code
there's just no reason to believe that
and I worry about the near-term problem
of what humans do with increasingly
powerful AI how it amplifies
misinformation most of what's online
could soon be fake can we hold a
presidential election 18 months from now
that we recognize as Valor right like is
it safe and it just gets scarier and
scarier I worry we're just going to have
to declare bankruptcy to the internet
if your intuition is correct are you
optimistic about our chances of survival
before this episode starts I have a
small favor to ask from you two months
ago 74 of people that watch this channel
didn't subscribe we're now down to 69 my
goal is 50 so if you've ever liked any
of the videos we've posted if you like
this channel can you do me a quick favor
and hit the Subscribe button it helps
this channel more than you know and the
bigger the channel gets as you've seen
the bigger the guests get thank you and
enjoy this episode
oh
[Music]
son
six years ago you did a TED Talk
um I watched that Ted Talk a few times
over the last week and this Ted Talk was
called can we build AI without losing
control over it in that Ted Talk you
really discussed the idea whether
um AI when it gets to a certain point of
sentience and intelligence will
will wreak havoc on Humanity
six years later
where'd you stand on on it today
do you think are you optimistic about
our chances of
survival survival yeah I mean I can't
say I'm optimistic I'm I am worried
about two
species of problem here that are related
I mean there's sort of the near-term
problem of just what humans do with
increasingly powerful Ai and
um
how it amplifies the the problem of
misinformation and disinformation and
make and just makes it harder and harder
to make sense of reality together
um
and then there's just the the longer
term concern about you know what's
called alignment with with artificial
general intelligence where we build AI
that is is
truly General and you know by definition
superhuman and it's competence and power
and then the question is have we built
it in such a way that is aligned in a in
a durable way with with our interests
and
um
I mean there's some people who just
don't see this problem that they're kind
of blind to it when I'm in the presence
of someone who doesn't have doesn't
share this intuition they don't resonate
to it
I just don't understand what they're
doing or not doing with their minds in
that moment
let's say I'm wrong about that well then
you know it's just the other person's
right and so we're just we just have
fundamentally different intuitions about
about this particular point and then the
point is this
if you're imagining building true
artificial general intelligence that is
superhuman and that is what everyone
whatever their intuitions purports to be
imagining here I mean there's you know
there are people on both sides of the of
the alignment debate
the people who think alignment's a real
problem and or and people think it's a
total fiction
but everyone you know virtually everyone
whose party to this conversation agrees
that we will ultimately build
artificial general intelligence that
will be superhuman and it's in its
capacities
and there's very little you have to
assume to be confident that that we're
going to do that and there's really just
two assumptions one is that intelligence
is substrate independent right there's
no it doesn't have to be made of meat it
can be made in silico right and we've
already proven that with narrow AI I
mean there's just this we obviously have
intelligent machines and you know your
calculator and your phone is better than
you are at arithmetic and it's just
that's that's some very narrow band of
intelligence
so as we keep building intelligent
machines
on the assumption that there's nothing
magical about having a computer made of
meat
the only other thing you have to assume
is that we will keep doing this we will
keep making progress
and eventually we will we will be in the
presence of something more intelligent
than we are
and that's not assuming Moore's Law is
not assuming exponential progress we
just we just have to keep going right
and when you look at the reasons why we
wouldn't keep going those are all just
terrifying right because intelligence is
so valuable and we're so incentivized to
have more of it and every increment of
it is is valuable it's not like it only
gets valuable when you get you know when
you double it or 10x it no no if you
just get three more percent right that's
that's uh that pays for itself
um so
we're going to keep doing this our
failure to do it suggests that something
terrible has happened in the meantime
right we've had a World War we've had a
global pandemic far worse than covid we
got hit by an asteroid something
happened that prevented us as a species
from continuing to make progress in
building intelligent machines right so
absent that we're going to keep going
we will eventually be in the presence of
something smarter than we are
and this is where intuitions divide
my intuition and it's shared by by
many people I'm sure I know at least one
who you've spoken to
my intuition is that
there is something inherently dangerous
for the Dumber party in that
relationship there's something
inherently dangerous for the Dumber
species
to be in Pre in the presence of the
smarter species and we have seen this
you know based on our entanglement with
all other species dumber than we are
right or certainly less competent than
we are
and
buy so buy it reasoning by analogy it
would be true of something smarter than
we are
um
people imagine that because we have
built these machines that is no longer
true right but
and here's where my into tuition goes
from there
that is that imagination is
born of not taking intelligence
seriously right because what
intelligence is is
a you know a mismatching intelligence in
particular is
a
a fundamental
lack of insight into what the smarter
party is doing and why it's doing it and
what it will do next on the part of the
Dumber party right so I mean you just
couldn't imagine that
by analogy just imagine that that dogs
had invented us as their their super
intelligent AIS
right
for the purpose of making their lives
better you know just securing resources
for them securing comfort for them
making getting the medical attention
um
it's been working out pretty well for
the dogs for about 10 000 years right I
mean there's some exceptions we've got
we've mistreat certain dogs but
generally speaking
for most dogs most of the time humans
have been a great invention right now
it's true
that
the
the mismatch in our intelligence
dictates a fundamental blindness with
respect to what we've become in the
meantime right so like we have all these
instrumental goals and things we care
about that they cannot possibly conceive
right they know that when we go get the
leash and say it's time for a walk they
understand that particular part of the
language game but everything else we do
when we're talking to each other when
we're on our computers or on our phones
they don't have the dimmest idea of what
we're up to and
if we ever if something happened if we I
mean we love the truth is we love our
dogs we make just irrational sacrifices
for our dogs we prioritize their health
over all kinds of things
that is just amazing to consider
and yet
if we learn if there was a new you know
Global pandemic kicking off and some
xenovirus was jumping from dogs to
humans and it was just a super Ebola
right it was just it was 90 lethal and
if this was just a forced choice between
him what do you value more you're the
the lives of your dogs or the lives of
your kids right if that's if that's the
situation we were in it's totally
conceivable unless it's not a you know
not by no means impossible
we would just kill all the dogs right
and they would never know why right we
would just and it's because we have this
layer of of
mind and culture and and just just the
the new sphere right there's just this
this realm of of of mind that requires a
requisite level of intelligence to even
be party to even know exists
that they have they have no idea it
exists right and it's
so this is a fanciful uh analogy because
the dogs did not invent us but evolution
invented us right Evolution has coded us
you know as I said to survive and spawn
and that's it right so Evolution can't
see
everything else we've done with our time
and attention and and all the values
we've formed in the meantime and all the
ways in which
we have explicitly disavowed the program
we've been given right so Evolution gave
us a program
but if we were really going to live by
the likes of that program
what would we be doing and we would be
having as many kids as possible right
you know the guys would be going to
sperm banks and donating their sperm and
finding that like the best use of their
time and attention it's like the idea
that you could have hundreds of kids
for which you have no financial
responsibility
that would be the that should be the
most rewarding thing that you could
possibly do with your time
as a man
and
yet that's obviously not what we do and
there are people who decide not to have
kids and they're people who and and yet
and everything else we do
from you having podcast conversations
like this to to
curing diseases type of Interest like
literally everything we're doing with
our you know with science with with
culture
is yes there are points of contact but
between those those products and our
evolved capacities right it's not it's
not just it's not magic right we are
social primates that that have leveraged
certain ancient Hardware to do new
things
but evolution the code that we've been
given doesn't see any of that right and
we've not been optimized to build
democracies right
um Evolution knows nothing it can know
nothing if evolution were a coder
there's just no there's no democracy
maximization in that code right it's
just it's not a it's not there so the
idea that these things
will stay aligned with us because we
have built them because if we have this
origin story that we gave them their
initial code and yet we gave them a
capacity to rewrite their code and build
future generations of themselves right
um
there's just no reason to believe that I
see no and and the mismatch
in intelligence is intrinsically
dangerous and you could see this by
I mean it's just Stuart Russell I don't
know if you had him on the podcast he's
a great
um
professor of computer science at
Berkeley and he he wrote literally
co-wrote one of the most popular
textbooks on AI
um
he has some arresting analogies which I
think are good intuition pumps here um
and one is just think of how you would
feel if
you knew like unless we got a
communication from elsewhere in the
galaxy
and it was a message that we decoded and
it said people of Earth we will arrive
on your lowly planet in 50 years get
ready
right
that anyone who thinks that we're going
to get super intelligent AI in let's say
50 years
things were were essentially in that
situation
and yet we're not responding emotionally
to it in the same way if we if we
received a communication from a a
species that we knew
just by by fact by the sheer fact that
they were communicating with us in this
way we knew they were more competent and
more powerful and more intelligent than
we are right and they're going to arrive
right
we would we would feel
that we were on the threshold of the
most momentous change in the history of
of our species
and we would feel but most importantly
we would feel that it's because
this is a a relationship an unavoidable
relationship that's being foisted upon
us right it's like we like some a new
creature is coming into the room
right with its own capacities
and now you're in relationship and and
one thing is absolutely certain it is
smarter than you are right by by what
factor I mean ultimately we're talking
about by factors you know just by so
many orders of magnitude it's it
our intuitions completely fail I mean
even if even if it was just
a difference in in the time of
processing even if it let's say there
was no difference in in the actual you
know native intelligence but it's just
processing speed
a million fold difference in processing
speed is is just
a phantasmagorical difference in
capacity so like just imagine we had 10
Smart Guys in a room over there and they
were working and thinking and talking a
million times faster than we are right
well so they're no smarter than we are
but they're just faster
and we talked to them once every two
weeks just to catch up on you know what
they're up to and what they want to do
and whether they still want to
collaborate with us well
two weeks for us is 20 000 years of
analogous progress for them
right so how could you how could we
possibly hope to constrain the opinions
and collaborate with and negotiate with
people no smarter than ourselves who are
making twenty thousand years of progress
every time we make two weeks of progress
right it's just it's it's
is unimaginable and yet
there are many people who don't that
just think this is just fiction
everything I all all the noises I've
made in the last five minutes are just
like a
a new religion of fear right and it's
just there's no reason to think that
alignment is even
a potential problem if your intuition is
correct and the analogy of us getting a
signal from outer space that someone is
coming in 30 years which by the way a
lot of people that speak on this subject
matter
um don't believe it's even going to be
30 years yeah until we reach that sort
of Singularity moment I think they speak
of artificial general intelligence I've
heard people like Elon say you know
many fewer decades 10 10 years 15 years
20 years Etc if that is correct then
surely this is the most pressing
challenge conversation issue of our time
and there's no logical reason
that I can see to
refute your intuition there
I I can't see a logical reason the rate
of progress will continue
don't necessarily see anything that will
wipe out or pause our rate of progress
um
I mean let me just to uh be charitable
to the other side here there are other
assumptions that they smuggle in that
they some people I mean some do it
without
being aware of it but some actually
believe these assumptions and This
spells the difference on on this on this
uh particular intuition
um so so it's possible to assume that
the more intelligent you get the more
ethical you become by definition right
now and we might you know draw a
somewhat more equivocal picture from
just the human case where we see that oh
there's some very smart people who
aren't that ethical but
they're I believe there are people I
mean I've talked to a few at least a few
people who believe this
there are people who assume that kind of
in the limit as you push out into just
just
if
far beyond human levels of intelligence
there's every reason to believe that all
of the the
provincial creaturely
failures of human ethics will be left
behind as well it's like you're not like
the the selfishness and the and the and
the basis for conflict like what like
these are not the apish urges of you
know status seeking
uh
monkeys is is just not
it's not going to be in the code and as
you push out into into just kind of the
Omnibus Genius of of the coming AI
you're gonna there's a kind of a
sainthood that's going to come along
with it right and and a wisdom that will
come along with it now
I just think that's a that's quite a
gamble I I think I would take the other
the other side of that bet and and I
would frame it this way
there have to be ways in the space of
all possible
intelligences that are beyond the human
right there's got to be more than one
possible there's got to be just like
there's many different ways to have a
chess engine that's better than I am at
chess
they're still they're they're different
from each other but they're all better
than me right
um there's got to be more than one way
to have a superhuman artificial
intelligence
and I would I would imagine there there
are
you know not not an infinite number of
ways but just a vast number of of
in the space of all possible Minds there
are many locations in that space beyond
the human
that are not aligned with human
well-being right there's got to be more
ways to build this
unaligned then aligned right and what
other people are smuggling into this
conversation is the intuition that no no
once you get beyond the human
is just going to get it's just you're
going to be in the presence of you know
just the Buddha who understands quantum
mechanics and oncology and everything
else right
I just see no reason to think that
that's so and we we could build
something that is
again taken intelligence seriously
we're going to build something we're in
relationship to it's really intelligent
in all the ways that we're intelligent
it's just better at all of those things
than we are it's by definition
superhuman because the only way it
wouldn't be superhuman the only way it
would be human level even for 15 minutes
is if we didn't let it improve itself if
we wanted to just keep it stuck at you
know at a we just we built a college
undergraduate we wanted just to keep it
stuck there but we would have to dumb
down all of the specific capacities
we've already built right just like all
every AI we have narrow AI is superhuman
for the thing it does you know it's it's
it has access to all the information on
the internet right it's just like it's
got perfect memories it can perfectly
copy itself when one part of the system
learns something the rest of the system
learns it because it just can swap files
right it can it's um you're again your
your phone is a bit is a superhuman
calculator there's no reason to make it
a a calculator that is human level
um
and so we're never going to do that
we're never going to be in the presence
of human AGI we will be immediately in
the presence of superhuman AGI and then
the question is how quickly it it
improves and how far they're how much
Headroom is there to improve into
on the assumption that you can get quite
a bit more intelligent than we are right
that there's like they were nowhere near
the summit of possible intelligence
you have to imagine that you're going to
be in the presence of something
that is again it could be completely
unconscious right this I'm not saying
that there's something that's like to be
this thing
although there might be and that's a
totally different problem that's worth
worrying about
but
whether conscious or not
it is solving problems detecting
problems
improving its capacity to do all of that
in ways that we can't possibly
understand
and the products of its increasing
competence are always being surfaced
right so it's like it's
we've been we've been using it to change
the world we became we've become Reliant
upon it we built this thing for a reason
I mean one thing that's been amazing
about the developments in recent months
is that
those of us who have been at all
cognizant of the AI safety space for you
know now going on a decade or more for
some people
always assumed
that as we got closer to the end zone
we'd become either the labs would become
more circumspect we'd be building this
stuff
air gap from the internet you know it's
like we have this phrase air gapped from
the internet like we thought this was a
thing like you this thing would be in a
box and then the question would be
well do we let it out of the box and let
it do something right like is it safe
and how do we know if it's safe right
and we thought we would have that moment
we thought it would it would happen in a
lab at Google or at Facebook or
somewhere we thought we would hear okay
we've got something really impressive
and now we just want it to touch the
stock market or we wanted to touch the
our medical data or we just want to see
if we can use it
we're way past that right we've built
this stuff already in the wild it's
already connected to the internet it's
already got millions of people using it
it already has apis it's already it's
already doing work so from an AI safety
point of view that's amazing like we
didn't even have the moment the the
choice point we thought was going to be
so
fraught of course we didn't we we
because there was such
pressing incentives for people to press
forward regardless of that conversation
especially but yeah everybody everyone
everyone thought I mean I was never I
was I don't believe I was ever in
conversation with someone with someone
like Elias or udakowski or or Nick
Bostrom or Stuart Russell
who assumed we would be in this spot
like I just everyone we because
you know I'd have to go back and look at
those conversations but
there was so much time spent you know it
seems quite unnecessarily on this idea
that
circumspect we'd make a certain amount
of progress and circumspection would
kick in like even the people who are who
were doubters would become worried and
at their and there would be like in the
final yards you know as we go across
into the end zone
there'd be some mode where we could sort
of slow down and figure it out and try
like try to deal with the arms race
Dynamics like let's place a phone call
to China and and and just like let's
talk about this we got something
interesting but the stuff has already
been built in connection to everything
and there's already just endless
businesses being
being
devised on the on the the back of this
thing and all the improvements are going
to get plowed into it and so just
imagine what this looks like even in
success right like let's say it just
starts working wonders for us and we
just we get these great productivity
gains and
okay
so then we cross into the into the you
know whatever the singularity is right
at whatever speed we find ourselves in
the presence of something that is truly
General after all of this stuff is all
of this narrow stuff
uh albeit superhuman narrow stuff is
is something that we totally depend on
right like every hospital requires it
and every airplane requires it and all
of our missile systems require it and
it's we're just this is the way we do
business
um
there is no there's nothing to turn off
at that point I mean I just don't you
know it's like I guess
I mean I put this to Mark Andreessen on
my podcast and he said yeah you can turn
off the internet I mean I don't I can't
believe he was quite serious I mean yes
if you're North Korea I guess you can
turn off the internet for North Korea
and that's why North Korea is like North
Korea but the idea that
we could I mean it just the cost of
turning off the internet now would be
uh
I think it would be unimaginable in the
in the in the economic just the economic
cost alone
it just would be
um
so anyway I'm interested the the idea
that we've we've lost the moment to
decide whether to hook our most powerful
AI to everything
because it's already being built more or
less in contact with if not everything
many so many things that you just can't
put the genie back in the bottle that's
that is genuinely surprising to me and
um
yeah I mean incentives is this not the
most pressing problem then because I I
was going to ask about this conversation
by asking you the question about the
thing that occupies your mind the most
and the most important thing we should
be talking about and I I in part assume
the answer would be artificial
intelligence because the way that you
talk about your intuition on this
subject matter you've got children
yeah you think about the future a lot
um if you can see this
species coming to Earth in the next even
if it's in the next 100 years
um it strikes me to be the most pressing
problem for Humanity
well I do I'm
as interesting as I think that problem
is and and consequential as it is
I'm
I'm worried that life could become
unlivable in the near term before we
even get there like I'm just worried
about the the misuses of narrow AI in
the meantime just I'm worried about just
just take the current level of AI we
have you know we have gpt4
um
I I think within the next 12 months or
two years let's say let's say we
whatever GPT 5 is
we're going to be in the presence of
something where
most of what's online that purports to
the information could soon be fake right
we're like
just most of the text do you find on any
topic is just fake right like someone
has just decided write me a thousand
Journal articles on why mRNA vaccines
cause cancer
and give me you know 150 citations write
them in the in the style of Nature and
nature genetics and Lancet and Jama
um and just put them out there right
right one teenager could do that in five
minutes with the right AI right it's
like it's just like we're not gpd4 is
not quite that but
gpt5 you know possibly will be them it's
like that that is such a near-term
advance right or get you know just when
you imagine knitting together
the visual stuff like mid-journey and
Dolly
um
and stable diffusion with with a large
language model
just imagine the tool again this is
maybe this is 18 months away maybe it's
three years away but it's not 30 years
away
the tool which where you can just say
give me a 45 minute documentary on how
the Holocaust never happened filled with
archival imagery give me you know Hitler
speaking in German and with it with the
appropriate translations and
um
give it give it in the style of Alex
Gibney or Ken Burns or and
give me a 10 000 of those right like
that like that's all all the friction
for misinformation has been taken out of
the system and
yeah I worry we're just going to have to
declare bankruptcy with respect to the
internet like just like we just are not
going to be able to figure out
what's real and when you when you look
at how hard that is now with social
media uh in the in the aftermath of of
covid and Trump
and how just the challenge for of
holding an election that most of the
population agrees was valid right that
challenge
already
is is
on the verge of being insurmountable in
the U.S right
I mean it's just like it's easy to see
us failing at that AI aside now when you
add a large language models to that and
the more competent
future version of it where it's just the
most compelling deep fakes are
indistinguishable from
you know real data
um
and everyone is siled into their tribes
where they're stigmatizing the
information that comes from any other
tribe and we're just and the internet is
now so big a place that
there really isn't the ordinary
selection pressures where where bad
information gets successfully debunked
so that it goes away it says you can
live in a conspiracy cult
for the rest of your life if you want to
you know you can be queuing on all day
long if you want to
and now we've got deep fakes Shoring all
that up
and just spurious you know scientific
articles showing all that up I all this
becomes a more compelling form of
psychosis and you know culturally
speaking and so I'm just worried that
it's good it's going to get harder and
harder
for us to cooperate with one another and
collaborate
and that our politics Will just
completely break and that'll you know
offer
an opportunity for lots of
you know Bad actors and I mean leaving
aside there's cyber terrorism and
there's their synthetic biology that you
know the moment you get you turn AI
loose on on the on the prospect of
of engineering viruses and you know all
of that it's like it it potentiates I
mean the asymmetry here is that
it seems like it's it's always easier to
break things than to fix them or to
prevent people categorically prevent
people from breaking them and what we
have with increasingly powerful
technology is the ability for one person
to create more and more damage or one
small group of people right and it was
so it's just
it just turns out it's hard enough to
build a nuclear bomb that like one
person can't really do it you know no
matter how smart you need a team and you
need to you need
it's traditionally you've needed State
actors and you need you need access to
resources and you have to get the
physical material and
it's hard enough but this isn't this is
being fully democratized this Tech and
so it's
um
yeah I worry about the near-term chaos
I've never found the narrow term
consequences of artificial intelligence
to be that interesting until now is that
what you said that image of like the
internet becoming unusable so that was a
real Eureka moment for me because I've
not been thinking about that yeah no me
too I was I was just concerned about the
AGI risk and now
really in the in the aftermath of trump
and kovid I've just I see the risk of
um
you know it if not losing everything
losing a lot that matters
just based on our
and interacting with just these very
simple
tools that that are Mis reliably
misleading us I mean I'm just I'm amazed
at what social media
I forget about I'm amazed at what
Twitter did to me I mean you know even
with all of my
training and all you know with my head
screwed on reasonably straight I mean
it's amazing to say it but
almost all of the truly bad things that
have happened to me in the last decade
that just really like just destabilized
relationships and
and just priorities and really like I
kind of got plowed back into kind of
became a kind of professional emergency
you know stuff I had to respond to you
know in writing or on podcasts
it was on Twitter it was my my
engagement with Twitter was the thing
that produced the chaos and it was
completely unnecessary
um
and it was just it was amplifying a kind
of signal for me that I felt compelled
to pay attention to
because I was on it and I was trying to
communicate with people on it I was
getting certain communication back and
it was giving me a picture of the rest
of humanity which I now think was
fundamentally misleading but it was it
was still consequential in its yeah like
even believing it was a certain point
believing that it was misleading wasn't
enough to inoculate me against the
delusion of these kind of the opinion
change that was being forced upon me
um and I was feeling like okay like
these people are becoming unrecognizable
like I know some of these people I've
had dinner with some of these people and
their behavior on Twitter is is
appearing so deranged to me and so in
such bad faith
um
the people are uh people who I know to
be
non-psychopaths are starting to behave
like Psychopaths at least on Twitter and
I'm becoming similarly unrecognizable to
them that it's just again it it all felt
like a psychological experiment to which
I hadn't consented which I enrolled
myself somehow because it was
it was what everyone was doing in 2009
um and I spent you know 12 years there
getting some signal and responding to it
and
it's not to say that it was all bad I
mean I read a bunch of good articles
that got linked there and I you know I
discovered some interesting people but
uh
the change in my life after I deleted my
Twitter account was so enormous I mean
it's embarrassing to admit it I mean
it's just it's like it's like getting
out of a bad relationship and it was
just it was a fundamental
um
just freedom from from this this chaos
Monster that was it was always there
ready to disrupt something but based on
its own Dynamics and when did you do
Lisa
um yeah like December I think it was
December I would and I'm not someone
that really takes sides on things I like
to try and remain in the middle I think
politically so you must have a very
different Twitter experience than I was
having no no no
so I don't treat anything other than
this podcast trailer don't do anything
else right okay so I just did anything
you'll see on my Twitter is the podcast
trailer that's it yeah and for all the
reasons you've described and more
interestingly I wanted to say in the
last eight months as someone that tries
to be doesn't get caught up too much in
the media oh Elon bought this it's a
hundred percent gone in that direction
as in my timeline now is I say to my
friends all the time and some of my
friends who are again I think are
nuanced and balanced have said to me the
there's something that's been turned up
in the algorithm to increase engagement
that has planted me in an unpleasant
Echo chamber that I didn't desire to be
in and if I wasn't Cog somewhat
conscious I would 100 be in there my
timeline my friend tweet the other day
my friend Castle tweeted he's never seen
more people die on his Twitter timeline
than he has in the last six months
they're prioritizing video so you're
seeing a lot of like
death in CCTV footage that I've never
seen before and then the debate around
gender
um politics
right-leaning subject matter has never
been more right down your throat yeah
because it's been it's almost like
something in the algorithm has been
switched where it's now it's now like
people have been let out the Asylum
that's you know I can describe it
and it's made me retract even more so
when Zuckerberg announced threads the
other the other couple of weeks ago
it was kind of like a a life raft right
out of this out of the Titanic
um and I really really mean that and I'm
not someone to get easily caught up in
narrative you know as it relates to
social media platforms it's been my
industry for a decade but what I've seen
on Twitter and it's actually made me
believe this hypothesis I had five years
ago where I thought they would be
um I thought the the Journey of social
networking would be would have way more
social networks and they'd be more siled
I thought we'd have one for our
neighborhood our football club and now I
believe that even more than ever yeah
that seems right and I think I mean
whether it's possible to have a truly
healthy social network that people want
to be in and it's a good reason to be
there and it's it's uh I don't know if
that's possible I I like to think it is
but it's um
I think there's certain things you you
have to
clean up
at the outset that is supposed to make
it possible I mean I think I think
anonymity is a bad thing I think
um
probably being free is a bad thing I
think for you if you know you sort of
get what you pay for online and if it's
if it's uh I just think they're there
there might be ways to set it up that
where it would be better but I don't
think it would be popular
was that I think with the thing that
makes it popular makes it toxic right
right and even the anonymity piece I've
played this out a couple of times in my
mind and the rebuttal I always get is
well there's people in Syria who have
news to break important needs to break
and they they'd be hung if they
so we need a Anonymous version of the
social internet right yeah well I guess
there could be some exception there but
um
I don't know it just doesn't it actually
doesn't interest me
because
I just feel such
a different sense of
my being in the world as a result of not
paying attention to
the my online
simulacrum of myself is it's it's a um
because Twitter was the only one I used
like I was on I've been on Facebook this
whole time I've been on I think I I
guess I'm on Instagram too but like my
team just uses those as marketing
channels you know it's just like you it
sounds like that's the way you use
Twitter now but Twitter was the the one
that I decided okay this is going to be
me
I'm gonna be posting here I'm gonna you
know if if I've made a mistake I want to
hear about it you know it's like and I
just want to use it as actual uh an
actual basis for communication
um
and for the longest time it actually
felt like a valid tool in that respect
you know it reached a crisis point I
decided this is just pure toxicity
there's just no reason even the good
stuff can't possibly make a dent in the
bad stuff so I just deleted it and then
I was I was returned to the real world
right where I've where I actually live
and to books and to I mean I'm online
all the time anyway but up but it's not
having the this is the time course of
reactivity
when you don't have social media when
you don't wait and you don't have a
place to put this this instantaneous hot
take
that you're tempted to be put out into
the world because there's literally no
place to put it like if like for for me
if I have some reaction to something in
the news
I have to decide whether it's worth
talking about it in my next podcast that
I might be recording you know four days
from now
and rather often people have been just
bloviating about this thing for four
solid days before I ever get to the
microphone and I then I get to think
well this is still worth talking about
in most almost nothing survives that
test anymore right it's like the
conversations moved on
so there's actually no place for me to
just type this thing that either takes
me 10 seconds and then rolls out there
to get
to detonate in the minds of you know my
friends and enemies to opposite effect
and then I see the the result of all
that you know on a again on a the sort
of reinforcement Loop of every 15
minutes
um
not having that is such a relief that I
just don't even know why I would so like
when threads was announced I wasn't I
think I'm on threads too but it's not me
it's just you know just again another
marketing channel
um but yeah I haven't I feel such relief
not
exercising that muscle anymore where
it's like I I you know I don't know how
often I was checking
Twitter but it was I was you know I was
not checking it just to see what was
happening to me or what the response to
my La the last thing I tweeted I was
checking it a lot because it was my news
feed it's like I'm following you know
200 smart people they're telling me what
they're paying attention to and so I'm
fascinated so yeah well yeah I want to
see that next article or that next video
just that engagement and the endless
opportunity to comment and to put my
foot in my mouth or put my foot in
someone else's mouth or have someone put
their foot it's just
not having that has been such relief
that I would be I mean it's not
impossible but I would be very
cautious in reactivating that because it
was it was so much noise and again it
would it created
there's so much it became a
uh I mean it became an opportunity cost
but it became a just this endless
opportunity for misunderstanding but
especially misunderstanding of me and
you know everything I've been putting
out into the world and then my sense
that I had to react to it and then you
just can't plow that
back into the
you know that that becomes the basis for
further misunderstanding
um
and it just it constantly was giving me
the sense that there's something there's
something I need to react to on my
podcast in an article on Twitter
that
it's just this is a valid signal like
this is this is this is like this is a
five alarm fire this is like you got to
stop everything like you're by the pool
on the One Vacation you're taking with
your family that summer and
this thing just happened on your phone
that like it can't wait right like you
actually have to pay attention because
it's like the conversation is happening
right now and so it was a kind of
addiction to information and right you
know some level reputation management or
or or
[Music]
um
and it was just I mean just yeah to just
be free of it is such a relief apart
from like you know
health issues with certain family
members
virtually the only bad things that have
happened to me have been a result of my
engagement with Twitter over
the last 10 years
so it's just it's just you know I I you
know I guess I'm if I'm a masochist I
would be back on Twitter but like that
would be the only reason to do it narrow
AI I asked you the question a second
year which we um
I really wanted to get a solution to it
because I'm mildly terrified I
completely believe you'll believe your
um the logic underneath your opinion
that narrow area will cause this
um destabilization and usability of the
internet
so just focusing on narrow AI what what
would you consider to be a solution to
prevent us getting to that world where
misinformation is right to the point
that it can destabilize Society politics
and culture
well I think it's something I've been
asking people about on my podcast is
because it's not actually my wheelhouse
and I would just need to hear from
experts about what's possible
technically here but
um
I'm imagining that
paradoxically or ironically
this could Usher in a new kind of
gatekeeping that we're going to rely on
because like the provenance of
information is going to be so important
I mean the the the the assurance that a
video has not been manipulated or
there's not a a just a pure confection
of
of deep fakery
right so you get so
it could be that we're we're Meandering
into a new period where
you're not going to trust a photo unless
it's come it's coming from you know
Getty Images or you know the New York
Times has some story how the about how
they have verified every photo in their
that they put in their newspaper they
have a process and you know so if you
see a a a video of of Vladimir Putin
seeming to say that he's
declaring war on the U.S
right I think
most people are going to assume that's
fake until proven otherwise it's like
it's just it's just going to be too much
fake stuff and it's going to be it's all
going to look so good that the New York
Times and every other you know
organ of media that we have relied upon
um as imperfect as they've been of late
they're going to have to figure out what
the tools are whereby they can say okay
this is actually a video of Putin right
and if the new I mean I'm not going to
be able to figure it out on my own right
the New York Times doesn't have a
process or CNN doesn't have a process
that they go through before they say
Okay Putin really said this and so this
is we have to now react to this because
this is real
um
whatever that process is and you know
whether it's whether there's some kind
of digital Watermark that you know
that's connected to the blockchain
that's I mean there's there's some tech
implementation of it that can be fully
democratized where you by just being in
the latest version of the Chrome browser
can know that you're so you you can
differentiate you know real and fake
videos say I don't know what the
implementation will be but I just I just
know we're going to get to some spot
where it's going to be all right
we have to declare epistemological
bankruptcy we don't know what's real we
have to assume anything especially lurid
or agitating is fake until proven
otherwise so prove otherwise
and that's you know that that'll be a
resetting of something I don't know
what we do with that in a world where we
really don't have that much time to
react to certain things that are you
know a video of Putin saying he's
launched his big missiles
is something that you know 30 minutes
from now we would we would understand
whether it's real or not
I mean forget about again forget about
everything we just said about AI
look at all of our Legacy risks look at
the risk of nuclear war the the risk of
stumbling into a nuclear war by accident
has been hanging over our head for 70
years I mean we've got this old Tech
we've got these wonky radar systems that
throw up errors we've we have
moments in history where
you know one Soviet sub-commander
decided based on his just gut feeling
his common sense that the data was
almost certainly an error and he decided
not to pass the the the the obvious
evidence of a an American ICBM launch up
the chain of command knowing that the
chain of command would say okay you have
to fire
right and he reasoned that if the U.S
was going to attack the Soviet Union
they would launch more than I think in
this case it looked like there were four
missiles that was the radar signature
if the us is going to launch a first
strike against the the Soviet Union in
one of this like the mid 80s
um
they're going to launch more than four
missiles right this has to be this has
to be bad data right so this is that but
you know so if we automate all this will
we automate it to systems that have that
kind of common sense right
um
but
we've been perched on the on the edge of
the Abyss based on this this the
possible forget about malevolent actors
you know who might decide to have a
nuclear war on purpose we have the
possibility of of accidental nuclear war
you add this cacophony of misinformation
and deep fake to all of that and it just
gets scarier and scarier and this is
just this is not even AI this is just
you know you know narrow AI Amplified
misinformation how do you feel about it
well I mean this is the thing that
worries me I I worry about the next
election you know I think the next
president if we can run the 2024
election in a way that most of America
acknowledges was valid
that will be an amazing Victory you know
whatever the outcome I mean obviously I
would not be looking forward to a trump
presidency but um
I think even more fundamental than that
is can we hold a presidential election
18 months from now
that is that we recognize as valid right
like that I I don't know I don't know
what kind of resources are being spent
on on that particular
performance but that is hugely important
and
I don't think
our near-term experiments with AI is
going to make that easier why is it so
important
well it's just I mean if you think the
maintenance of
of uh a valid democracy in in the
world's low in superpower is is of minor
importance I
um I'd like to drink the tea you're
drinking
but yeah it's Mystic
I mean I I'm I can't say I'm optimistic
I'm you know it's
it's a paradoxical State I mean because
I I definitely I I tend to focus on
what's wrong or might be wrong
I tend to
I think have a a pessimistic bias right
like I I tend to notice what's wrong as
opposed to what's right you know I mean
that's my
um
that's my bias but
I'm actually very happy right like I
have a very a very good life I'm just
like everything is is I just I'm
incredibly lucky I'm surrounded by great
people it's like it's just it's all
great
and yet I see all of these
risks on the horizon so I'm like I'm not
um
I just I have a very high degree of
well-being at this moment in my life and
yet I like what's on the television is
scary and so it's it's it's very
interesting juxtaposition yeah
you know I will be I'll be very relieved
if we have a
busy or just I feel like we're in a very
weird spot I mean like the I haven't
seen a
a full postmortem on the coveted
pandemic that has fully encapsulated
what I think we what I think happened to
us there but my my vague sense is that
we didn't learn a whole hell of a lot I
mean basically what we learned is we're
really bad at responding to this kind of
thing this was a challenge that that
just fragmented us as a society it could
have brought us together
it didn't
and
it it Amplified all of the the divisions
in our society politically and and
economically and tribally in all kinds
of ways the role of misinformation and
disinformation on all of that was was
all too clear and I think just getting
worse so I think you know as a dress
rehearsal for some future pandemic
that's that is inevitably going to come
and is you know could well be worse I
think we failed this dress rehearsal and
you know I have to hope that at some
point our institutions
will reconstitute themselves so as to be
obviously trustworthy and engender the
kind of trust we actually need to have
at our institutions like we need a CDC
that not only that we trust but that is
trustworthy that we that we that we're
right to trust right
and and so it is with an FDA and every
other you know institution that that is
relevant here and
we don't quite have that and half of our
society thinks we don't have that at all
right and and so it's
um we have to rebuild trust in
institutions somehow and I just think
you know we have a lot of work to do but
to even figure out how to make
an increment of progress on that score
because
we're again the siloing of of large
constituents into alternate
information universes is just just not
functional and that's so much of what
social media has done to us and
alternative media I mean like you know I
call it you know you and I are
podcasters but I call it podcast to Stan
right we have this this landscape of I
mean there's now whatever million plus
podcasts and there's
you know you email newsletters and
everyone has now just decided to curate
their information diet in a way that's
just bespoke to them and
you can stay there forever and you're
getting you're getting one slice of and
it could be a you know
a completely fictional slice of of
reality and
um we're losing the ability to converge
on a common picture of what's going on
and you
so did that sound optimistic I didn't
hear the optimism there you tell me no I
I no I but I I kind of can't refuse to
anything you said on a like a logical
basis it all sounds
um like that is the direction of travel
that we're going in unfortunately
um I have faith that they'll be
surprising
positives it always tends to be
surprising positives that we also didn't
factor in
um it's easy to see
I mean if there's anything if there's
any significant low-hanging fruit
technologically or or
scientifically that could be AI
enabled for us let me just take like you
know a cure for cancer a cure for
Alzheimer's I mean just having one thing
like that
right that would be such an enormous
good
um
and that so that that is that's what
that's why we can't get off this ride
and that's why there is no break to pull
because the value of intelligence
is so enormous I mean it is it is just
it's not everything I mean it's not that
you know there's there are other things
we care about and a right to care about
Beyond intelligence I mean love is not
the same thing as intelligence right but
intelligence is the thing that can
Safeguard everything you love right like
even if you think the whole point in
life is to just get on a beach with your
friends and your family and just hang
out and enjoy the sunset
okay
you don't have to augment you you don't
need superhuman intelligence to do any
of that right you're you're fit to do it
exactly as you are you could have done
that in the 70s and it would just be
just as good a beach and they'd be just
as good friends
but
every gain we make in intelligence is
the thing that safeguards that
opportunity for you and everyone else
how would you I feel like we've not
defined the time artificial general
intelligence from my understanding of it
it's when the the intelligence can think
and make decisions almost like a human
yeah maybe Loosely this
this is a kind of just a semantic
problem but
intelligence can mean many things but
you know Loosely speaking it is the
ability to solve problems
uh and
meet goals make decisions
in response to a changing environment in
response to data
um
and the general
aspect of that is an ability to do that
in across in many different situations
all the sort of situations we encounter
as people
and to have one's capacity in one area
not you know as I get better at deciding
whether or not this is a cup I don't
magically get worse at deciding whether
you know you just said a word right it's
like I can do but it's like I can do
multiple things in multiple channels
that's not something we had in our
artificial systems for the longest time
because we were everything was bespoke
to the task we'd build a chess engine
and it couldn't even play Tic-Tac-Toe
all I could do was play chess and they
could and we and we just would get
better and better in these in these
piecemeal narrow ways and then
things began to change a few years ago
where you'd get you know with like deep
mind would it would have its algorithms
that were
uh you know the same algorithm with
slightly different tuning could play go
right or it could you know it could
solve a protein folding problem as
opposed to just playing chess right and
it became the best in the world at chess
and I became the best in the world to go
and
um
and amazingly I mean to take you know
Alphas what Alpha zero did
it
you know before Alpha zero
all the chess algorithms were they just
had all of our chess knowledge plowed
into them if they had studied every
human game of chess and they just it was
just you know it was
it was a bespoke chess engine Alpha zero
just played itself I think for like four
hours right it just it just had the
rules of Chess and then it played itself
and it became better not
merely than every other every person
who's ever played the game it became
better than all the chess engines that
had all of the the all of our chest
knowledge plowed into them so you it's a
fundamentally new moment in in how you
build an intelligent system
and it promises this this possibility
again
this inevitability the moment you admit
that we will eventually get there the
moment the moment you admit
that it's it can be done in silico
and the moment that you admit that we
will just keep going unless a
catastrophe happens
and those two things are so easy to
admit that I just don't at this point I
don't see any place to stand where
you're not forced to admit them right I
don't see any neuroscientific or
cognitive scientific
argument for
substrate dependence for intelligence
given what we've already built and
again we're we're going to keep going
until something stops us right we'll hit
some immovable object that prevents us
from releasing the next iPhone but other
otherwise we're going to keep going and
then yeah so then it then we'll whatever
General will mean
in that first case they'll be a case
where
we've built a system that is so good at
everything we care about
that is functionally General now maybe
it's missing something maybe it's not
you know maybe it's missing something
that we don't even have a name for you
know we're missing all kinds of their
possible intelligences that we haven't
even thought about because we just
haven't thought about them right there
there's the things that there are ways
to section the universe undoubtedly that
we can't even conceive of because we are
just we have the minds we have Elon was
asked a question on this by journalists
the journalist said to him in a world
where you believe that to be true that
artificial general intelligence is
around the corner when your kids come to
you and say Daddy what should I do with
my life
Define purpose and meaning
what advice do you now give them if you
hold that intuition to be true
that it's around the corner
what do you say to your children when
they say what should I do with my life
to create purpose and meaning and
did you say that Elon answered this
question yeah what did he say it's one
of the most chilling moments in an
interview I think I've seen in recent
times because he stutters he goes silent
for about 15 seconds which is very
annelon he stutters he stutters
um he stutters a bit more because he
can't
and then he says he thinks he's suspend
he's living in suspended disbelief
because if you've really thought about
it too much what's the point he says
what's the point of me building all
these cars he was in his Tesla Factory
these cars and what's the point I do
think that sometimes so I think I have
to live in as his words were suspended
disbelief right well I would encourage
him to ask what's the point of spending
so much time on Twitter because that he
could clearly benefit from
rethinking that but
um that aside
I mean my answer to that is
and I think other people have echoed
this of late
um
I mean it's sort of surprising to me my
answer is that
this begins to privilege
a return to the the humanities as a kind
of a core like the center of of of mass
intellectually for us because when you
look at what we're
really good at and
uh
it's among the last things that can be
plausibly automated
uh and if if we automate it
we may cease to care about it so it's
like
learning to write good code is something
that is going to be it's being automated
now it's it is you know I'm not a
programmer but
um you know I have it on good authority
that already these large language models
are improving code and something like
half the time they're writing better
code than than people
that's all going to become like chess
right it's just it's going to be better
than people ultimately
um
so being a software engineer is
something that you know and being a
radiologist and being like those things
it's easy to see how AI just cancels
those professions or at least makes one
person
you know so effective at using AI tools
that you know one person can do the work
of 100 people so you've got 99 people
who don't have to be doing that job
um
but
creating art and you know writing novels
and being a philosopher and uh
talking about
what it means and to live a good life
and how to do it it's like that's that's
something that if we
we have we have to look at those we have
to look at
where we're going to care that we're
actually in relationship to and in
dialogue with
an another person who's who we know to
be conscious
right like where we don't care about
that we're not going to care we're going
to want just the best version of it like
I don't care if the cure for cancer
comes from an incentive and AI
I do not give a I just want the
cure for cancer right like there's no
added value
that where I find out okay the person
who gave me this cure really felt good
about it and he's you know he had tears
in his eyes when he figured out the Cure
every engineering problem is like that
we want safer planes we want you know we
just want things to work we're not
sentimental about the the Artistry that
went into all of that
uh and when the difference when the gulf
between the best and the mediocre gets
big and consequential
we're just going to want the best we're
just going to want the best all the way
down the line but what is the best novel
right what is the best podcast
conversation what is it and can you
subtract out
the the conscious person from that and
still think it's the best and and so
like so someone once sent me a um
what purported to be I didn't even
listen to it so I'm not even sure what
it was but it looked like it was an AI
generated conversation between
Alan Watts and Terence McKenna right
both guys who I love I remember I didn't
know either of them but fans of both
have listened to hundreds of hours of
both talk as far as I know they never
met each other it would have been a
fascinating conversation
um I realized my when I looked at this
YouTube video I realized I simply don't
care how good this is because I only
care if it was actually Alan Watts and
Terence McKenna talking like a
simulacrum of Alan Watson and Terence
McKenna in this context
I don't care about right so another use
case I I stumbled upon
I was playing with with chat GPT and
I asked it you know the causes of World
War II you know give me 500 words on the
cost of World War II because it gives
you this perfect little you know bullet
pointed essay on the cause of World War
II
that's exactly what I want from it
that's fine that's like I don't care
that it was there was no person behind
that typing
but when I when I think well
do I want to re read
Churchill's you know history of World
War II it's on my shelf to read as I you
know it's like I'm one of these
aspirational sets of books haven't read
it yet
um
I actually want to read it because
Churchill wrote it right like that
that's why and if you could give me an
AI version of Churchill saying this is
in the style of Churchill it's very even
Churchill Scholars say this sounds like
Churchill
I actually don't care about it like like
that's not the used I I'll take the
generic use of you know give me the cost
of World War II
the fake Churchill is profoundly
uninteresting to me the real real
Churchill even though he's dead is is
interesting to me so the rebuttal I give
here and this is what my mind is doing
is yeah saying this
the distinction you're you're presenting
the the difference I see is that in the
case of the conversation between two
people you respect that has been
generated by AI someone has signaled you
that that it is fake
if you remove that because say Churchill
thought yeah why would I write a book
when I could just click a button and
this thing will write it in my in my
voice in my tone of voice with my you
know with the entire the entire back
catalog of things I've written before
and it will produce my my account and it
will save me time so I'll just click a
button my publisher maybe will do it for
me and then I'll sell that to Sam on the
basis that it is
um my thoughts which I imagine I I can
imagine a very near future if we just do
it by percentage how many books are
going to be increasingly written by
artificial intelligence to the point
that when you look at a shelf I imagine
at some point in the future if the
intelligence does increase
um by any measure that most of it would
be words strung together by artificial
intelligence and it will be selling
potentially better than the words
written by humans so again when we go
back to the conversation with your your
children
there might not be a career there either
because artificial intelligence is
faster can produce more contest and
iterate on whether it sells better
clicks gets more clicks it can write the
headline create the picture write the
content and then I can just take the
chat because I put my name to it
yeah
so I go even in that regard what remains
well so in the limit
what I think we're imagining is a world
where
and so none of the terror none of the
terrifyingly bad things have happened so
it's just all working we're just
producing a ton of great stuff that is
better than the human stuff and people
are losing their job so we gotta we got
a labor disruption but we're not talking
about any other kind of political
catastrophe or or you know cyber
apocalypse
um
much less AGI destroying everything
then I think we just need a different
economic assumption and ethical
intuition around the value of work I
mean our default Norm now
in a capitalist Society is you have to
figure out something to do with most of
your time
that other people are willing to pay you
for
right you have to figure out how to add
value to other people's lives such that
you reliably
get paid otherwise
you might die right like we've got a
social safety net but it's it's pretty
meager you know we're not we're there
are cracks you can follow through you
could wind up homeless and we're not
going to figure out what to do about
that we're all too well you know and
um
your so your claim Upon Your Existence
Among Us
you finding something to do with your
time that other people will pay you for
right
and now we've got artificial
intelligence removing some of those
opportunities creating others but in the
limit
and I do think it is different from I
think analogies to other moments in in
technological history are fundamentally
flawed I think this is a a technology
which in the limit will replace jobs and
not create better new jobs in in their
wake right it's just this just cancels
the need for
for human labor ultimately
and it's strangely it replaces some of
the highest status most cognitively
intensive Jobs first right you know it
replaces replaces Elon Musk before it
replaces your electrician or your
plumber or your masseuse way before
right so we have to internalize the the
reality of that if again this is in
success this is not it's all good things
happening right
um
and we have to have a new ethic we have
to have a new economics based on that
ethic which is
you know Ubi is one solution to this
like you shouldn't have to work to
survive right Universal basic income
yeah there's there's so much abundance
now being created
we have to figure out how to spread this
wealth around right we've got a cure for
cancer over here we've got perfect
you know
photovoltaic uh
driven economies over here where it's
like we've solved the climate change
issue you know we're just pulling wealth
out of The Ether essentially
um we've got you know nanotechnology
that is just birthing whole new
Industries yeah but it's all being
driven by AI we don't you know there's
no room in this whenever you put a
person
in the in the
CH in the decision chain you're just
adding noise this is the best thing this
should be the best thing that's ever
happened to us this is just like God
handing us the perfect labor-saving
device
right the machine that can build every
other machine they can do anything you
could possibly want
we should figure out how to spread the
wealth around in that case right this is
just powered by sunlight no more Wars
over resource extraction
it can build anything
we can all be on the beach just hanging
out with our friends and family right
like do you believe we should do
Universal basic income where everybody's
given like a month so something we have
to break this connection again this is
this is
what will have to happen in the presence
of this kind of Labor Force dislocation
enabled by
all of this going perfectly well right
like this again just as pure success
just AI is just producing good things
and the only bad thing is is putting all
these people out of work you know it's
coming for your job eventually I've
heard this and I've my issue with it am
I rebuttal when I talk to my friends
about this idea of universal basic
income when we you know we hand out
enough casual resources to people so
that they're stable which I'm not
necessarily against but just just want
to play with it a little bit is humans
seem to have an innate an innate desire
for purpose and meaning and we seem to
be designed and built psychologically
for labor and for a discomfort but it
doesn't have to be labor that's tied to
money right like it can be like we we
will get our status in other ways and
we'll get our meaning in other ways and
again this is all these are all just
Stories We Tell ourselves I mean like
you know you're talking to a person who
knows it's possible to be happy
actually doing nothing right like like
just sitting in a room for a month right
and just staring at the wall right
because I've done it like that's
possible right so so and yet that's most
people's worst nightmare you know it's a
solitary confinement in a prison is
considered a torture right and I know
people who spent 20 years in in a cave
right so it's like there's a their
capacities here that we're talking about
but
um
just more more commonly I think we will
we want to be entertained we want to
have fun we want to be with the people
we love we want to be
useful in relationship and
insofar as that gets uncoupled from the
necessity of working to survive right it
doesn't all just go away we just need
new norms and new ethics and new
conversations around what we do on
vacation right it's like so what what
you're imagining is that if you put
everyone on vacation on the best
vacation you can make the vacation as
good as possible
a majority of people will eventually be
miserable because they're they're not
back at work
right and yet they're most of these
people are working so that they have
enough money so they could finally take
that vacation right we will figure out a
new way to be happy
on the beach right I mean like if you
can't if you get bored with frisbee we
will figure something else out that is
fun you know you you can re you know
I'll be able to read The Churchill
history of World War II on the beach
and not be rushed by any other
imperative because I'm you know I I I'm
happily retired right because my AI is
creating the thing that is solving all
my economic problems right
um
you know we should be so lucky as to is
to have that be our problem like how to
be happy in conditions of no economic
imperative no basis for political Strife
on the on the basis of scarce resources
and no question about the the question
of survival is off the table
one does with one's time and attention
right you can be as lazy as you want and
you'll still survive you can be as
unlucky as you
as you want and you and you'll still
survive and they could the awful
situation we're in now is that
differences in luck
mean everything right you know someone
is born in a in without any of the
advantages that we have
we don't have a s we don't have a system
we have an economic system that reliably
gives them every advantage and
opportunity opportunity they could have
right so it's like it's we just
we um
we don't have the re you know we
apparently we've convinced ourselves we
either don't have the resources or we've
convinced ourselves we don't have the
resources we don't have the incentive
such that we access the resources so as
to actually come to the help of people
we could help right I mean the idea that
people starve to death is just it's
unimaginable and yet it still happens
you know that's not a scarcity problem
it's a political problem wherever it
happens and yet all of this is tied to a
system where everyone has convinced
themselves
that is normal
to really have one survival be in
question
if one doesn't work
right and and we by choice or by
accident like like if you get if you
haven't you know
I think I think it's still true that in
the at least in the U.S this is almost
certainly not true in the UK but in the
U.S
the most common reason for a personal
bankruptcy is um you know overwhelming
medical expense that just comes upon you
for whatever reason well you know your
wife gets cancer you guys go bankrupt
solving the cancer problem or failing to
solve the cancer problem and now
everything else unravels right and we we
have a society which thinks yeah well
unlucky you you know that's
you know if you wind up homeless just
don't sleep in front of my store because
I need my you know you're going to hurt
my business
um like you know successful AI
that cancels lots of jobs would be it
would be it would only be canceling
those jobs by virtue of producing so
many good things
so much value for everybody that we
would we would have to figure out how to
spread that wealth around otherwise we'd
yeah otherwise we would have a
and you know if
an amazing amazingly dystopian
bottleneck for a few short years and
then we would just have a revolution
right then we'd then the guys in their
in their you know gated communities
making trillions of dollars based on
them having you know gotten close enough
to the gpus uh that they that it you
know some of it rubbed off on them
um
yeah they'd be dragged out of their
houses and off their Gulf streams and
you know we would have a fundamental
reset we have a hard reset of the
political system
if I had to put you in a yes or no
situation and ask your intuition the
question now that if your objective was
to which I'm sure it is is to encourage
the betterment of humanity and to
increase our odds of happiness and
well-being 100 years from now
um and there was a button placed in
front of you and it would either end the
development of artificial intelligence
as we've seen it over the last decade so
it would never we'd never proceed with
developing intelligent machines
um or not so you could press a button
and stop it right now
stop it permanently such that we never
then do that thing we just never figure
out how to build intelligent machines
pause it indefinitely
well I would definitely pause it
to a point where we would we would could
get our heads around the alignment
problems permanently
if the button was a permanent pause that
you couldn't undo
well the question is how deep does that
go so like we we have everything we have
now but we just yeah it just never gets
better than yeah we never make progress
from here right
um and your objective is to make
Humanity happy and prosperous
it's hard because when you when you
begin
imagining all of the good stuff that we
could get with with aligned superhuman
AI well then you know then the it's just
you know Cornucopia upon Cornucopia it's
just everything is everything is
potentially Within Reach
yeah I mean I I take the existential
risk scenario seriously enough that I
would I would pause it you know I would
say I mean I think we will get we will
eventually get to if
if curing cancer is a is a biomedical
engineering problem that admits of a
solution and I I think there's every
reason to believe it ultimately would be
we will eventually get there based on
our own you know muddling along with our
you know current level of tech you know
currently a information Tech
um I'm you know reasonably confident of
that
um
because I mean aren't you know our
intelligence shows every sign of being
General it's just it's not um
it's not as fast as we would want it to
be it's not it's not what the thing that
AI is going to give us is is going to
give us
uh
speed that is
um I mean there's speed and there's the
the access there's memory right it's
like and like we we can't integrate we
don't have the ability we have
no person or team of people can
integrate all of the data we already
have right so that like the the real
promise here is that
a these systems will be able to find
patterns that we wouldn't even know how
to look for and then do something on the
basis of those patterns you know I think
an intelligent search within the data
space You Know by by Apes like ourselves
will eventually do uh most of the the
great things we want done and you know
the there isn't there isn't uh
I mean the pro the problems we need to
solve
so as to safeguard the the
[Music]
um
the the career of our species and to
make civilization durable and sane and
and
uh
to remove this sort of Damocles that is
over our heads at every moment that you
know at any moment we could just decide
to have a a nuclear war that ruins
everything or or create a a an
engineered pandemic that ruins
everything
we don't need superhuman intelligence to
solve all those problems and we need the
we need an appropriate emotional
response to the the
the untenability of the status quo and
we need we need a political dialogue
that eventually transcends our our
tribalism for those of you that don't
know this podcast is sponsored by Weaver
company that I'm a shareholder in and
I'm obsessed with my woop it's glued to
my wrist 24 7. and for those of you that
don't know it's essentially a
personalized wearable health and fitness
coach that helps me to have the best
possible Health my whip has literally
changed my life whip is doing something
this month which I'd highly suggest
checking out it's a global Community
challenge called The Core 4 challenge
essentially they guide you through a set
of four activities throughout the month
of August that are scientifically proven
to improve your overall health I'm
giving it a go and I can't wait to see
the impact it has on me and I highly
recommend you to join me with that so if
you're not on weep here there is no
better time to start if you're a friend
of mine there's a high probability that
I've already given you a week because
I'm that obsessed with it it is the
thing that I checked when I wake up in
the morning it's the first thing that I
look at I want the information on my
sleep to then plan my day around so if
you haven't joined woop yet head to
join.woop.com
CEO to get your free whoop device and
your first month free try it for free
and if you don't like it after 29 days
they're going to give you your money
back but I have a suspicion that you're
going to keep it check it out now and
let me know how you get on send me a DM
quick one if you've been listening to
this podcast for some time one of the
recurring messages you've heard over and
over and over again especially when we
first had that conversation with Tim
Spector is about the importance of
Greens in our diet and a while ago I
started pressing my friends at hewell to
come out with a product that did exactly
that allowed you to have all those
greens the vitamins and minerals you
need in a drink and after several
several several months of iterations and
processes they released this product
called huel Daily Greens which is now
one of my favorite products from heel
because it tastes great and it fills
that very important nutritional Gap that
I had in my diet the problem is
it launched in the US and it sold out
straight away and became a Smash Hit for
fuel for the rare reasons I've described
it's now back in stock in the United
States but it's not here in the UK yet
so if you're a UK listener which I know
a lot of you are it's not yet available
so
let's all attack you let's DM them
everywhere we can and tell them to bring
huel Daily Greens to the UK this is the
product when it is available in the UK
I'm going to let you know first but
until then let's spam their DMs
you and I'd say a few others maybe two
or three others help change my mind
about one of the most profound things I
think anyone could believe which was
when I was 18 I believed in Christianity
and then there was a couple of moments
that shook my belief nothing on a
personal level just a couple of ideas
that managed to sort of
infect my operating system that led my
curiosity towards
um your work and I changed my mind
profoundly it's such a profound change
that I had
um how do we change our minds and I and
I really want to I really want to focus
that question on the the individual the
individual's mind like I want to change
my mind I want better beliefs better
ideas in my head that are going to allow
me to get out of my own way
um because I I'm not achie I'm miserable
I'm not living the life that I
I would say I know I can live but some
people don't even know they can live
live a better life I'm not happy that's
the signal
and I want to I want to rectify this in
some way
yeah well there are a few
bright lines for me I mean like take um
our ethical lives and our relationships
to to other people right so
um there's there's the problem of
individual well-being that kind of is
still real even if you're in a moral
Solitude if you're you know on a desert
island by yourself
you really don't have ethical questions
that are emerging because you're not in
relationship to anybody else but you
still have the problem of how to be
happy
but so much of our unhappiness is in
collaboration with others right we're
unhappy in our relationships we're
unhappy professionally
um
and it's worth looking at how we're
behaving with other people
uh for me that the the highest leverage
change
I ever made and it's against it's very
easy to spell out and it's very
clear
um
and ultimately it's pretty easy is just
to decide that you're not going to lie
about anything really I mean there might
be some situations in extremis where
you'll feel forced to lie but those you
know in my view are are analogous to
acts of violence that you may be forced
to to use in self-defense right so like
a line is sort of the first stage on the
Continuum of violence for me right so
like I'm not going to lie to someone
unless I I recognize that this is not a
rational actor who I can possibly
collaborate with this is someone I have
to be
um I have to avoid or defeat or
otherwise you know contain the the their
propensity for to do me harm uh so yes
if the Nazis come to the door and ask if
you've got Anne Frank in the Attic yes
you can lie or you can shoot them or you
can these are not normal circumstances
but that aside every other moment in
life where people are tempted to lie
um
is one that I I think you can
categorically
rule out as being unethical and being
Beyond unethical
it's just not it's
it's creating
a
a life you don't when you when you
examine it you don't want to live right
in the moment you know that you're not
going to lie to people and they know
that about you
um
the the
it's like all of the dials get the
social dials get sort of recalibrated on
both sides and then
you find yourself
in the presence of of people who
don't ask you for your opinion unless
they really want it right and then and
then when you're honest I mean then then
it's
it's not it's a night and day difference
when you're giving people feedback
critical feedback and
they know you're honest right they know
they're they they're you know they're
they're detector is not going
off because they just know you're you're
even when it's not convenient you're
being honest and or even when it's not
comfortable you're being honest
um
one that's incredibly valuable because
basically you're you're giving them the
information that you would want if you
were in their shoes right because we
have this sort of delusion that takes
over us when whenever we're tempted to
tell a white lie we imagine okay
this person doesn't want it much better
for me to just tell them the kind
fiction and then tell them the the
uncomfortable truth right but we don't
do the so we don't even calculate that
you know for the Golden Rule there most
of the time and we if you if you just
took a moment you'd realize oh wait a
minute
does someone who
is actually doing a bad job want me to
tell them that they're doing a good job
and then just send them out into the
world to bounce around other people who
are going to be recognizing as I just
did that the thing they're doing isn't
so great right
um you're just not doing them a favor
right this is part of the nature of
belief changes in it that when someone
we believe that someone is on our side
or We Believe from like a political
standpoint that they they represent the
99 of the views that we represent we're
much more likely to change our beliefs
expect to tally Shara about this the
neuroscientist and I wrote about this in
a chapter in my upcoming book about how
you how you change people's minds and
they showed in the elections that if
like a flat earther says something to a
flat earther about the nature of the
earth I believe it but if NASA says
something to a flat earther they will
just dismiss on site because the source
of that information is not one that they
believe or trust or like or believe is
well-intentioned I mean this this is a
bug not a feature I mean it's
understandable but this is something we
have to grow Beyond because the the the
truth is the truth right so you can't
I mean again it goes in both directions
the person on your team who you love and
respect is capable of
in their very next sentence of speaking
of falsehood right and you need to be
able to to detect that
and conversely you know the the person
you least respect is capable of saying
something that's that's quite incisive
and worth taking on board and and so
that's we have to
we have to have this sort of meta
cognitive
layer where we're noticing how we're
getting played by our
our social alliances and
recognize that the truth and and rather
often important truths are are um
uh evaluated by different principles I
mean it's not a matter of the message
the messenger you know you shouldn't
shoot the messenger and you shouldn't
worship Him you mentioned lying as being
a well
removing lying and being more honest as
being a significant step change in your
own happiness
is that accurate in my happiness and
your happiness yeah yeah
um yeah immensely so because it's it's
how practically and specifically how
so you I mean when you look at how
people ruin their reputations and their
relationships and their businesses their
careers
the gateway to all of the misbehavior
that accomplishes that is line it's I
mean look at somebody that Lance
Armstrong right I mean just or Tiger
Woods right these guys are the absolute
apogee of sport
they everyone loves them everyone's just
amazed at what they're what they've
accomplished
and
yet you know the the dysfunction in
their lives just gets vomited up for all
to see at a certain point and
it was just enabled at every stage along
the way by lying right so if if if
either of them had early in their career
before they became famous before they
became rich
before they became tempted to do
anything
um that was gonna
derail their lives later on if they had
decided they weren't going to lie
right they would have found all
everything else they they did to screw
up their success impossible
so when I decided and this is this is in
the book
this is a course I took it at Stanford
it was a a seminar with This brilliant
Professor Ron Howard who who many people
who I think some people in Silicon
Valley have taking this course as well
um
I mean this this course was just like a
machine you know undergraduates and
graduate students would come in on one
side and then 12 weeks later would come
out convinced that basically lying was
no longer on the menu right it's just
it's just it was it that the whole
seminar was an analysis of the question
is it ever
right to lie and really we focused on on
white lies I'm truly tempting lies as
opposed to
the obvious lies it's grow people's
lives and relationships
um
it's just so corrosive and it's
corrosive of relationships in ways
that
you
unless you're a student of this kind of
thing you you don't necessarily notice I
mean one example I believe is in that
that's in that book is that
I remember my wife was with a friend
uh and the two of them were out and the
the friend had something she she had to
do with another friend later that night
but she didn't really feel like doing it
um
and she got a call from that friend in
the presence of my wife and she just
lied to the friends to get out of the
plan right she said oh you know I'm so
sorry but my you know my daughters got
this thing and
it was just just an utterly facile
use of dishonesty
to get where she could have she could
have just been honest right but she just
it was just too awkward to be honest so
she just got out of it with a lie but
now it's in the presence of my wife and
my wife is now the the immediate
question is
how many times have I been on the other
side of that conversation right how many
times has she lied to me in an equally
compelling way about something so
trivial right and so it just eroded
trust in the in that relationship in a
way that the the liar would never have
known about would never have detected it
because it's just she just went right
back to having a good time with you know
they were just out to lunch and they
continued you know having their lunch
and they're still having a good time and
it's all smiles but my wife has just
logged something about kind of the
ethical limitations of this person
um and the person doesn't know it right
and so
once you sort of pull on this thread you
basically your entire life becomes for
at least for the the the transition
period when until this just becomes a a
habit you no longer have to consider
um
Suddenly It's your your
the world becomes kind of mirror thrown
up to your mind and you and your you
meet yourself in all these situations
where you are avoiding yourself before
so like someone will say
you know
do you want to have plans or do you
wanna do you want to collaborate with me
on this project and if previously you
you always had recourse to some kind of
white lie that just got you out of you
know the awkward
uh truth which is the answer is no and
they're actually reasons why not right
um
you never had it you never have to
confront the the awkwardness of that
you're this kind of person who has these
kinds of commitments and this kind of
it's like
I you know
I mean the most awkward one would be you
know someone declares a romantic
interest in you and the the the the the
the the the answer is no and then the
and the
the it's known for totally superficial
reason right like this person is is
either you're not they're not attractive
enough for you right you know they're or
they're overweight or whatever I mean
it's just it's like you have your reason
why not and this is something you feel
you cannot say right now I'm not saying
that
you should always go out of your way
like like you're someone with Tourette's
who just helplessly blurts out the truth
like there's there's a scope for for
kindness and compassion and tact
but
if someone is going to really drill down
on the reasons why not if the person
says no I want to know exactly why you
don't want to go out with me
there's something to discover on on on
either side of that true disclosure
right like either you are cast back on
yourself and you have to realize okay
I'm such a superficial person that it
doesn't matter who anyone is
if they're 10 pounds overweight I'm not
interested right that's that's the
mirror held up to your minds like okay
all right so you're that kind of person
do you want to still be that kind of
person do you really want to just decide
that
everyone no matter what their virtues
right and no matter what has been going
you know what no matter what chaos is
going on in their life and they actually
this person might actually lose those 10
pounds next month and you would have a
very different situation but
are you really not available are you
really filtering by weight in this way
um
and are you really comfortable with that
and are you comfortable
saying that like if you if if somebody
forces you to actually be honest we have
a closing tradition on this podcast
where the last guest leaves a question
for the next guest not knowing who
they're going to leave it for the
question that's been left for you
impeccable handwriting
where do you want to be when you die
describe the place time
people smell
and feeling
well it's actually
uh connects with an idea I I've I've had
I mean I think what we need we haven't
talked about psychedelics here
but um there's there's been this
Renaissance in research and psychedelics
and it's hard to know I I I'm worried
that we could recapitulate some of the
the errors of the 60s and and uh
roll this all out in a way that's less
than wise but
the wise version would be I think we
need to recapitulate something like the
the mysteries of ellusis where we you
know we have rise of Passage that are
enabled by
in many people's case psychedelics and
and the practice of of meditation I just
think it's I think these are
just fundamental tools of insight that
are that
I mean for most people it's hard to see
how they would get them any other way
right I just think you know there's a
lot longer conversation about which
molecule and how and all that but
another component of this is a math a a
hospice situation where
the experience of dying is as
wisely
embraced and facilitated as is possible
and I think psychedelics could certainly
play a role for for many people there so
I imagine something like we we need a we
need places that are truly beautiful
that where you know people have gone to
die and their families can be you visit
them there and it is just a you know a
final rite of passage that is that is
embraced with you know
um
all the wisdom uh we can muster there
and
yeah so for in my case you know I would
want to be in you know currently I I'd
be happy to be home but you know
wherever a home is at that point I would
want a um
I would want a view of the the sky you
know it could be an ocean beneath the
sky that would be ideal right
um I just I mean it
there's there's basically nothing that
makes me happier than just looking at a
blue sky with just watching like cumulus
clouds move across a a blue sky I mean
it's just like
I can extract so much mental pleasure
just looking at that right it's just I
mean it's
um so yeah if I'm gonna spend my last uh
hours of life looking at anything if my
eyes are going to be open you know
looking at the sky and having the Stars
will the sky the daytime the daytime
yeah yeah I mean if I were if I light
pollution
is enough of a thing in my world that I
go for I feel like I go for years
without seeing a good nice guy
um so I've kind of given up hope there
but I do love that
um
but yeah just a you know a view of the
sky and with the people I love at that
point who are who are still alive at
that point
yeah I mean I'm not I'm not worried
about
death in that sense I mean I really
I think it's
it
the Death part is not a problem I mean I
I can't say I'm looking for if I can
imagine there could be sort of medical
chaos and uncertainty and all of the you
know the weirdness that happens around
the dying process right depending on
um
and there are all kinds of ways to die
that I wouldn't choose but having a nice
place to do that
with a view of the sky would be the the
only solution I think I would require
the question asks the smell
give me the smell smell give me an ocean
breeze I have put an ocean there so yeah
an ocean breeze would be perfect
Sam thank you so much thank you
um not just this conversation as I said
to you before you sat down you were
pivotal in
um really helping me to unpack some
problems when I was younger some
conflicts I should describe them as with
my my view on religious belief and
um and the nature of the world but I
think more more importantly you didn't
you didn't robber me of my religious
beliefs and leave me with nothing right
you left me with something else which is
something that was really important to
me which was the idea that there can
still be great meaning and there can be
what you describe as spirituality
in the absence or in the place of
um that religious belief religious
belief gives people you know a lot of
things and I I it's funny because when I
was religious and I went on the journey
to becoming agnostic let's say
um I was in conflict with people as in I
would want to have a debate with
everybody yeah and I spent those two
years watching everything that you and
Richard Dawkins and Hitchens had all
done
and then I came out the other side and
it was peaceful yeah and it's you
believe what you want I'll believe what
I want um as long as we're not causing
any conflicts with each other and you're
not doing any harm it's okay yeah and
then I discovered what I would call my
own spirituality which is my meaning the
meaning that I see in the world around
me and um and the self and things like
psychedelics
and it's a it's a better place to be and
it removes my fear of death which I had
as a religious person all right well
that's good so thank you yeah thank you
for that and all your subsequent work
but you know incredible books you've
written so many of them that are
absolutely incredible you've got an
unbelievable podcast which I was gorging
on before you came here as well in an
app
um which I mean if you could speak just
a few sentences about the meaning of the
app and what you do I know it's much
more than meditation now but I think
people listening to this might be
compelled to to check it out and
download it yeah so I had that book
which you're holding waking up which is
the um
uh which is where I talk about my
experience in meditation and just how I
fit it into a a
scientific secular worldview
um
and just it just turns out that an app
is a much better delivery system for
that kind of information I mean it's
just a hearing audio is you don't even
need you don't need video I think audio
is the perfect
medium for it so when that technology
came about or when I discovered it
um I just felt incredibly lucky to be
able to to build it and so it's it's
kind of outgrown me now there are many
many teachers on it and many other
topics Beyond meditation that are
touched but
um it's a
it really subverts all of the problems
that you know some of which we touched
upon here with the with the smartphone I
mean like the smartphone has become this
this tool of fragmentation for us it
fragments our attention it continually
interrupts our experience it's depending
on how you use it
um but most of what we do with it you
know you're checking slack you're
checking your email you're checking your
social media you're you're just it's
punctuating your life with with all this
stuff is you know at this point
seemingly necessary interruptions
but this app or you know any really any
app will like it that's delivering this
kind of content
subverts all that because it's just this
is this is it's just a platform where
you're getting audio that is guiding you
in a specific very specific use of
attention and a sort of reordering of
your priorities and getting you to to
recognize things about your experience
that you you wouldn't otherwise see and
yeah an app is it just a sheer good luck
it turns out it's it's just the perfect
delivery system for that information so
yeah I just feel very lucky to to have
stumbled upon it because again you know
10 years ago there were no apps and you
know there's just it was just all I
could do was write a book
Sam thank you yeah thank you thank you
so much yeah a pleasure to meet you
congratulations with everything it's
really it's oh thank you I was catching
up on your podcast in anticipation of
this and it's amazing the the reach
you've got now so yeah wonderful no it's
we're still trying to catch up with it
but it's a credit to all of the team and
I really want to say from the bottom out
thank you because the work you do is is
really really important
um it's been important in my life as
I've said but it's just really important
and we I feel like we're living in a
world where like nuance and all the
things you've talked about and openness
to debate and honest dialogue us we're
getting further further away from there
so if there's anyone left in this world
that's still willing to engage on that
level I feel like they must be protected
at all costs and I see you as one of
those people so thank you nice nice well
to be continued
[Music]
oh